Add an article about lwt.pause (#5)
dinosaure/blogger: articles/lwt_pause.md

---
date: 2024-02-11
article.title: Cooperation and Lwt.pause
article.description:
  A disgression about Lwt and Miou
tags:
  - OCaml
  - Scheduler
  - Community
  - Unikernel
  - Git
breaks: false
---

Here's a concrete example of the notion of availability and the scheduler used

> (in this case Lwt). As you know, at Robur we have developed a unikernel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(in this case Lwt). As you may know, at Robur we have developed a unikernel:
```
No guarantee that the reader is aware of opam-mirror

[opam-mirror][opam-mirror]. It launches an HTTP service that can be used as an

> OPAM overlay available from a Git repository.

Reviewer: Maybe add some words what this means: an OPAM repository you can use with e.g. `opam repository add myoverlay https://myopam-mirror/`

> The purpose of such an unikernel was to respond to a failure of the official
> repository (which fortunately did not last long) and to offer decentralisation
> of such a service (you can use https://opam.robur.coop!).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of such an unikernel was to respond to a failure of the official
repository, which fortunately did not last long, and to offer decentralisation
of such a service. You can use https://opam.robur.coop!
```

> It was also useful at the Mirage retreat, where we don't necessarily have a
> great internet connection. Caching packets for our OCaml users on the local
> network has benefited us in terms of our Internet bill.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was also useful at the Mirage retreat, where we usually don't have a
great internet connection. Caching packages for our OCaml users on the local
network has benefited us in terms of our Internet bill.
```

Reviewer: Maybe add at the end:
by allowing the OCaml users to fetch opam packages over the local network instead of over the shared, metered 4G Internet conncetion.

Finally, it's a unikernel that I also use on my server for my software
[reproducibility service][reproducibility] in order to have an overlay for my
software like [Bob][bob].

In short, I advise you to use it, you can see its installation
[here][installation] (I think that in the context of a company, internally, it
can be interesting to have such a unikernel available).

However, this unikernel had a long-standing problem. We were already talking
about it at the Mirleft retreat, when we tried to get the repository from Git,
we had a (fairly long) unavailability of our HTTP server. Basically, we had to
wait ~10 min before the service offered by the unikernel was available.

## Availability

> If you follow my articles, as far as Miou is concerned, from the outset there

Reviewer: Maybe link to the articles or https://blog.osau.re/tags/scheduler.html ?

> If you follow my articles, as far as Miou is concerned, from the outset there
> was talk of the notion of availability if we were to make yet another new
> scheduler for OCaml 5. We emphasised this notion because we had quite a few

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you follow my articles, as far as Miou is concerned, from the outset I
talk of the notion of availability if we were to make yet another new
scheduler for OCaml 5. We emphasised this notion because we had quite a few
```

problems on this subject and Lwt.

In this case, the notion of availability requires the scheduler to be able to
observe system events as often as possible. The problem is that Lwt doesn't
really offer this approach.

Indeed, Lwt offers a way of observing system events (`Lwt.pause`) but does not
do so systematically. The only time you really give the scheduler the
opportunity to see whether you can read or write is when you want to...
read or write...

More generally, it is said that Lwt's bind does not _yield_. In other words,
you can chain any number of functions together (via the `>>=` operator), but
from Lwt's point of view, there is no opportunity to see if an event has
occurred. Lwt always tries to go as far down your chain as possible:
- finish evaluating the promise

> - come across an operation that requires a system event (read or write)

Reviewer: Hmm, I think these paragraphs could be improved. I think it should be emphasized that `Lwt.pause` is a yield point. And that lwt is rather sparse in adding yield points besides `Lwt.pause` and read/write operations, in contrast with async where bind is a yield point.

### If there is no I/O, do not wrap in Lwt

> It was (bad) advice I was given. If a function doesn't do I/O, there's no point

Reviewer: Maybe put less emphasis on it being bad advice and more that it depends on your goals - if you prioritize throughput and don't care about availability it may be fine advice.

in putting it in Lwt. At first glance, however, the idea may be a good one. If
you have a function that doesn't do I/O, whether it's in the Lwt monad or not
won't make any difference to the way Lwt tries to execute it. Once again, Lwt
should go as far as possible. So Lwt tries to solve both functions in the same
way:

```ocaml
val merge : int array -> int array -> int array

let rec sort0 arr =
  if Array.length arr <= 1 then arr
  else
    let m = Array.length arr / 2 in
    let arr0 = sort0 (Array.sub arr 0 m) in
    let arr1 = sort0 (Array.sub arr m (Array.length arr - m)) in
    merge arr0 arr1

let rec sort1 arr =
  let open Lwt.Infix in
  if Array.length arr <= 1 then Lwt.return arr
  else
    let m = Array.length arr / 2 in
    Lwt.both
      (sort1 (Array.sub arr m (Array.length arr - m)))
      (sort1 (Array.sub arr 0 m))
    >|= fun (arr0, arr1) ->
    merge arr0 arr1
```

If we trace the execution of the two functions (for example, by displaying our
`arr` each time), we see the same behaviour whether Lwt is used or not. However,
what is interesting in the Lwt code is the use of `both`, which suggests that
the processes are running _at the same time_.

> "At the same time" does not necessarily suggest the use of several cores, but

Reviewer: (in parallel)

the possibility that the right-hand side may also have the opportunity to be
executed even if the left-hand side has not finished. In other words, that the
two processes can run **concurrently**.

But factually, this is not the case, because even if we had the possibility of
a point of cooperation (with the `>|=` operator), Lwt tries to go as far as

> possible and decides to finish the left part before launching the right part:

Reviewer: Hmm, "point of cooperation", "yield point" - please feel free to use "point of cooperation" where I previously mentioned "yield point".

Is it clear enough that `>|=` is **not** a yield point? It may be a bit confusing if the reader is not already familiar with what operations yield and not in lwt.

Maybe also emphasize "tries to go as far as possible" means "does not yield"

sort0: [|3; 4|]
sort0: [|2; 1; 7|]
sort0: [|1; 7|]
sort0: [|5; 8; 9; 0; 6|]
sort0: [|5; 8|]
sort0: [|9; 0; 6|]
sort0: [|0; 6|]

sort1: [|3; 4; 2; 1; 7; 5; 8; 9; 0; 6|]
sort1: [|3; 4; 2; 1; 7|]
sort1: [|3; 4|]
sort1: [|2; 1; 7|]
sort1: [|1; 7|]
sort1: [|5; 8; 9; 0; 6|]
sort1: [|5; 8|]
sort1: [|9; 0; 6|]
sort1: [|0; 6|]
```

#### Performances

It should be noted, however, that Lwt has an impact. Even if the behaviour is
the same, the Lwt layer is not free. A quick benchmark shows that there is an
overhead:

```ocaml
let _ =
  let t0 = Unix.gettimeofday () in
  for i = 0 to 1000 do let _ = sort0 arr in () done;
  let t1 = Unix.gettimeofday () in
  Fmt.pr "sort0 %fs\n%!" (t1 -. t0)

let _ =
  let t0 = Unix.gettimeofday () in
  Lwt_main.run @@ begin
    let open Lwt.Infix in
    let rec go idx = if idx = 1000 then Lwt.return_unit
      else sort1 arr >>= fun _ -> go (succ idx) in
    go 0 end;
  let t1 = Unix.gettimeofday () in
  Fmt.pr "sort1 %fs\n%!" (t1 -. t0)
```

```sh
$ ./a.out
sort0 0.000264s
sort1 0.000676s
```

This is the fairly obvious argument for not using Lwt when there's no I/O. Then,
if the Lwt monad is really needed, a simple `Lwt.return` at the very last

> instance is sufficient (or, better, the use of `Lwt.map` / `>|=`).

Reviewer: Maybe here it is good to say it's an argument for not using lwt when there's no I/O **if you care about throughput (much?) more than availability**

#### Cooperation and concrete example

So `Lwt.both` is the one to use when we want to run two processes
"at the same time". For the example, [ocaml-git][ocaml-git] attempts _both_ to
retrieve a repository and also to analyse it. This can be seen in this snippet
of [code][ocaml-git-both].

In our example with ocaml-git, the problem "shouldn't" appear because, in this
case, both the left and right side do I/O (the left side binds into a socket
while the right side saves Git objects in your file system).

In our example with ocaml-git, the problem "shouldn't" appear because, in this
case, both the left and right side do I/O (the left side binds into a socket
while the right side saves Git objects in your file system). So, in our tests
with `Git_unix`, we were able to see that the analysis (right-hand side) was
well executed and 'interleaved' with the reception of objects from the network.

### Composability

However, if we go back to our initial problem, we were talking about our

> opam-mirror unikernel. As you might expect, there is no MirageOS file system.

Reviewer: Why would they expect that? :D

Maybe: A filesystem is an optional component of Mirage applications, and many Mirage applications do not use any filesystem at all.

So, in the case of opam-mirror, we use the ocaml-git memory implementation:
`Git_mem`.

`Git_mem` is different in that Git objects are simply stored in a `Hashtbl`. So
let's return to our original advice:

> 

Reviewer: Maybe about here spell out that `Git_mem` does not add yield points? While `Git_??` using a filesystem does add yield points by virtue of the filesystem adding yield points through read and write operations.

`Git_mem` is concerned, we said that these read/write accesses were just
accesses to a `Hashtbl`. 

Thanks to [Hannes][hannes]' help, it took us an afternoon to work out where we
needed to add cooperation points in `Git_mem` so that `analyse_pack` could give
another service such as HTTP the opportunity to work. Basically, this series of
commits shows where we needed to add `Lwt.pause`.

However, this points to a number of problems:
1) it is not necessarily true that on the basis of composability alone (by
   _functor_ or by value), Lwt reacts in the same way
2) Subtly, you have to dig into the code to find the right opportunities where
   to put, by hand, `Lwt.pause`.
3) In the end, Lwt has no mechanisms for ensuring the availability of a service
   (this is something that must be taken into account by the implementer).

### In-depth knowledge of Lwt

I haven't mentioned another problem we encountered with [Armael][armael] when
implementing [multipart_form][multipart_form] where the use of stream meant that
Lwt didn't interleave the two processes and the use of a _bounded stream_ was
required. Again, even when it comes to I/O, Lwt always tries to go as far as

> possible in one two branches of a Lwt‧both.

Reviewer: one two? one or two?
```suggestion
possible in one of two branches of a Lwt‧both.
```

This allows us to conclude that beyond the monad, Lwt has subtleties in its
behaviour which may be different from another scheduler such as Async (hence the
incompatibility between the two, which is not just of the `'a t` type).

> ### Disgression on Miou

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Digression on Miou
```
